Kamil Salakhiev: Hey, Ron.
Mega | ethrex: Hello.
Daniel Knopik: Hello!
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, hey Daniel.
Kamil Salakhiev: Alright, maybe let's give another minute, and we can get started.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, okay, yeah, let's get started. I think today, yeah, would be great, yeah, first touch on,
Kamil Salakhiev: via client updates, Then, yeah, we discussed on, sparse pool progress, and also kind of readiness.
Kamil Salakhiev: For the upcoming, blob DevNets.
Kamil Salakhiev: And, Yeah, and if there are…
Kamil Salakhiev: If there is time, yeah, we can. I can just quickly do a heads up on, like, discuss the recent progress on
Kamil Salakhiev: Pq, interop, and, like, yeah, some shadow simulations there.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I don't think, like, we have many clients implement first today. Yeah, maybe, Daniel, you want to share any news from your side?
Daniel Knopik: Not much with regards to… partial messages for Gloas.
Daniel Knopik: But, we are… getting closer to the new Lighthouse release, which will support partial messages for Fulu.
Daniel Knopik: As well as some other things,
Daniel Knopik: Then, for sparse blob pool, so get blob V4, there's also not been… not a lot of progress, unfortunately, due to the lack of time, and…
Daniel Knopik: Yeah, important fixes.
Daniel Knopik: Finally… There is…
Daniel Knopik: the fact that we are going to, disable MPLEX by default in the next Lighthouse release.
Daniel Knopik: Yeah, Joao, do you want to say some… add something to that?
jxs: Hello? Nothing much to add. We spoke about at least.
jxs: About this lots of times before.
jxs: Yeah, we are deprecating it by default. Users who want to
jxs: Enabled it, can still do it.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, good, thanks.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I don't see… don't think we have anyone from Prysm.
Kamil Salakhiev: Any other seals?
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I see Anton, Anton,
Kamil Salakhiev: Maybe you have, I don't know, any updates on this?
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, hey.
Anton Nashatyrev: Yeah, hey, no, sorry, I have no updates on Facebook.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, okay. I heard, like, in Svalbard, we can discuss with your folks, like, there is some ongoing…
Kamil Salakhiev: progress regarding introducing Quick. Yeah, do you know any… anything on that?
Kamil Salakhiev: I mean, if Quick is supported, or not? I just remember the exact steps.
Anton Nashatyrev: I think it's a bit stale now.
Anton Nashatyrev: To be honest, I don't know the latest news, but I think it's not in progress.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, okay. Yeah, just maybe last question for you, sorry, not to mean to torture you with many things, but yeah, just glad to hear. Do you know, like, also, like, yeah, I know there is ongoing, active work on, cell-level deltas for…
Kamil Salakhiev: for Prysm and Lighthouse. Do you know, on the side, if anyone is working on that, or it's not a priority at the moment?
Anton Nashatyrev: No ideas.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay.
Kamil Salakhiev: No worries.
Kamil Salakhiev: Good, right, yeah, I think if no one else from… Seal teams, yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: Maybe, Chaba, do you want to give a quick update on Discovery P5 or other topics, or…
Kamil Salakhiev: on the guest side?
Kamil Salakhiev: Shall we feature?
Csaba: So yeah, I was just trying to… Yeah, so this V5, now, all clients started to pass tests. They're not still passing water tests, but, we are lucky to have, at least every client can enable this V5 now. So, we're getting there.
Csaba: I still urge them to look into the failing tests. I will do the same at one point and distribute these out.
Csaba: That's going well. On our side…
Csaba: yeah, different ongoing works. One is the heat disposable pool, the other is,
Csaba: still, member-related, changes and, bill management. So, that's, that's still the branches, it's coming.
Csaba: I'm also surveying the network. Only Dispute 5 nodes are still there. Obviously, still quite a lot on the mainnet, so…
Csaba: Let's see what the fuck is going to have done.
Csaba: That helps.
Csaba: I think that's all kind of in terms of many, many ongoing works in, expect to know.
Csaba: Changes.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, good. Yeah, thanks.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah,
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, since just we touched on Discovery 5v5, and yeah, we have… I invited Ithrex guys as well to join the image to discuss, some other stuff as well. Anyone from Ethrex, do you know, like, guys, is… anyone is working on Discovery V5 on your side, or…
Csaba: Esx is the one passing both tests, so… Nice. Yeah, yeah, they're good on that.
Csaba: Plus, gas is passing on the test, and
Csaba: And the one is passing all tests.
Csaba: I have a few… extra tests in… And a blanch.
Csaba: I think it says… was… was failing one of those when I was checking, so… I will merge those
Csaba: point up to the beyond as well.
Csaba: Fix it.
Csaba: In general, we should increase also test coverage on this.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, good.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, nice.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, moving to the next thing, yeah, regarding the sparse blog post.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I believe, like, yeah, maybe both of you can also share more on that, but we have kind of, like, a GEF and Nethermind team actively implementing the EIP.
Kamil Salakhiev: Basically, the EAP state, well, it's ready, yeah, we, I think in May, immersed, some recent changes, from my side. Also, we finalized
Kamil Salakhiev: engine API changes, I can…
Kamil Salakhiev: Just share links to that if, or other teams, so, yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: Sense.
Kamil Salakhiev: But yeah, I think EAP is pretty easy to find. It's AP870.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I think, yeah, for us to kind of roll out that for the next Blob DevNet, we would need to…
Kamil Salakhiev: well, ideally to kind of have more clients to support that. In that regard, I'm kind of curious,
Kamil Salakhiev: on Ethrex guys' perspective, I mean, what are their priorities?
Kamil Salakhiev: do they have time to implement that, or they were already working on the Sparse Blow Pool integration?
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, maybe anyone from you guys?
Pablo Deymo | Lambda: Yes, there is a…
Pablo Deymo | Lambda: sub-team of integrates working on that. I don't know if Edgar is in here to explain the stages, but will you start implementing that?
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, nice.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, we will have, yeah, I asked to create a Sparse Boppoo channel in Eastern Discord.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, so we can kind of coordinate there, kind of if there would be…
Kamil Salakhiev: I don't know, like, if you're ready, and yeah, we can kind of start some kurtosis tests and networks.
Kamil Salakhiev: Just ping us. One problem that I see at the moment is that we don't have
Kamil Salakhiev: CL that supports recent execution API changes. On that side, it would be great if, I don't know, Lighthouse, Prysm, or anyone else
Kamil Salakhiev: You kind of would also support that.
Kamil Salakhiev: Oh, great.
Kamil Salakhiev: Nice.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, if you have a link, by the way, to your PR, yeah, I can check later, but yeah, we can also test that.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, we can… it would be great to kind of have CO, supporting that. For now, we just have, I don't know, our VIPE coded
Kamil Salakhiev: implementations of CO, just simply to test that it works.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, nice. Thanks for sharing the PR link.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah… Other than that, we also need to… Hmm…
Kamil Salakhiev: introduce metrics, at least on CL side, it's easy. We just kind of have the same metrics that we have for the Get Blobs V3.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I created a… there is actually a repo.
Kamil Salakhiev: That it's covered with the Beacon metrics, and…
Kamil Salakhiev: I opened the PR for the…
Kamil Salakhiev: It's pretty straightforward, PR, just to have same…
Kamil Salakhiev: metrics that we have for GetBlobs v3, for Get Blops v4.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, we can merge it really soon.
Kamil Salakhiev: And, this would be notified.
Kamil Salakhiev: Utility, or of course, that the group changes.
kasey: Sorry, earlier you said that, you were looking for CL changes to help test, and I missed the beginning of the thread, so I think you're talking about for the sparse blob pool, you need to be notified. Yes.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, hey, Casey. Yes, do you know, like, on Prysm's side, if there is a branch for that?
Kamil Salakhiev: Already.
kasey: Not that I'm aware of, but, that seems… is that basically the extent of it? Just notifying the EL, kind of whenever there's a custody group change?
Kamil Salakhiev: Yes, yes, basically, Fortress Update, a new version of that call, so that, yeah, we notify the custody set, and also
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, using Git Blobs v4 instead of GitBlox v3.
kasey: Okay. We might treat… we might do, like, two separate PRs for that, but yeah, that, I think, at least the four-choice updated, part seems small, and, Gitball's V4, I'd have to look at it, but probably also not a big deal.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay.
Kamil Salakhiev: And I remember there was a hand raised, I think, Chabo, it was from you.
Csaba: Yep, so to speak. Not the next phase, but, the phase after.
Csaba: Now we also have, direct support in root doses to limit bandwidths and not, delays.
Csaba: So…
Kamil Salakhiev: Sorry, support for what?
Csaba: for limiting bandwidth on, in a Kurtosis testnet. So I, I had these, these scripts, external scripts, but Tally was not, now quoting it inside.
Csaba: decide, glutosis, so now we have… I don't remember what's the name of the tool, but anyway,
Csaba: Given this is bandwidth sensitive, we should,
Csaba: At one point, start testing this under damage constraints.
Csaba: Every lead is the first step, but
Csaba: It's, that's one of the things to do.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I'm just thinking of, like, yeah, how we can use it. I was thinking about, like, kind of limitations that we would have,
Kamil Salakhiev: If we run Kurtosis… I just…
Kamil Salakhiev: like, when we need to kind of run this tool, I mean, Kurtosis with kind of limiting bandwidth and putting latencies, versus using shadow simulations.
Csaba: Yeah, that's a different, yeah.
Csaba: It's a bit different game. The way I was using it was…
Csaba: with my scripts is, I was running,
Csaba: in a loop is different, actually, I wasn't even learning in Tulum. I was doing one LAN,
Csaba: Is, scaling the bandwidth, slowly down.
Csaba: And then, so doing the LAMP, which is the available bandwidths, and then, just monitoring analytics.
Csaba: So that's what I'm planning to do also here.
Kamil Salakhiev: Mhmes,
Csaba: I do externally running it with different vendors constraints, or does the lab.
Csaba: checks.
Csaba: constitutes change.
Csaba: This is more for… Let's put interoperability more for some clients, more of a few clients' tests.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, I remember Marco was recently kind of doing, shadow simulations for, like.
Kamil Salakhiev: I think around 1,000 nodes for cell-level deltas.
Kamil Salakhiev: So, I mean, that's… yeah.
Csaba: Yeah, the problem is…
Csaba: The problem with shadow simulators is that the bandwidth model and the TCP model and, yeah, if we are doing it quick, you are a bit better, because you don't have TCP models with the feeling, but still…
Csaba: Slightly less realistic, I think.
Csaba: than the Kurtosis, so there was also with Kurtosis has a lot network, with these kids.
Csaba: different Doppler containers, so they are supposed to be… they are not localhost communicating, so it should be relatively realistic, to the point that I'm is doing it.
Csaba: School.
Csaba: Yeah. Basically, both have the quirks, so I see.
Csaba: We kind of have to lap posts.
Csaba: more confident, and, just gain more confidence by… by having different frameworks, checking stuff.
Csaba: Before we go on, like, running, test this with ourselves.
Csaba: blah, blah, blah. I think that's expensive, this is cheap.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, just…
Kamil Salakhiev: Another thing, just to keep in mind when we can run Kurtosis networks, I mean, every node, they can compete for the same CPU resource.
Kamil Salakhiev: So if there are some heavy operations, so… Yeah, they might.
Csaba: Yeah, yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: Things don't.
Csaba: You should be mitigate it.
Csaba: Let's just…
Csaba: You should just run it well under the boundaries of the…
Csaba: I was using it for 5 more than 10 more than the switch, which is still 5.
Csaba: Excuse me.
Csaba: That much, that you have to go over the television a little bit.
Csaba: You should be careful with this guy as well.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, okay.
Csaba: You can also use it, like, like, you make the shadows, like, where you can scale the numbers, and you, you kind of verify the, the lower number size.
Csaba: Global size points of that with Kurtosis.
Csaba: So you got the confidence in, kind of, at least on the…
Csaba: on the part of the curve where you… where you can still run it from kurtosis, you are getting the same results from Kurtosis and from shadow. Then you have
Csaba: Some confidence that you are not doing success together.
Csaba: Is there any one way of using it.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, okay, good. Yeah, just getting back to, the sparse bull pool discussion, so, yeah, yeah, please, on the outside, if anyone has a branch, I mean,
Kamil Salakhiev: Prysm, Lighthouse, telco, please ping us, yeah, then we can signal. It's kind of, like, another thing we need to kind of be ready.
Kamil Salakhiev: for the…
Kamil Salakhiev: yeah, kind of deploying that on blob. Blob.nets, or in Glamsterdam devnets, when… I think there were some issues with blobs recently, and they're not there, if I'm not mistaken.
Kamil Salakhiev: Just checking that.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, yeah, Casey?
kasey: Priority question about…
kasey: express blob pool. Are we trying to treat this similar to partial messages, where it's, between forks, incremental rollout, or is this a Hego to…
kasey: Pork.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, it's not, like, a consensus change, so it could be done between forks, actually, so we don't need, like, every client to be, to support that.
Kamil Salakhiev: But yeah, we kinda need at least one CO to start testing that.
kasey: Yeah, I'm asking because, we might have to just prioritize against, partial messages, support in Gloas, so we'll keep that kind of top, top priority, and, once that's in a good spot, we can do a couple of these,
kasey: As far as small pool changes.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, yeah, I mean, yeah, it's… at once… in some sense, it's kind of straightforward change.
Kamil Salakhiev: On the other side, yeah, we kind of need to introduce metrics, also on the old side, that…
Kamil Salakhiev: a bit of work, yeah, maybe Bosu can elaborate on that, like, there are some nuances on how to implement, for example.
Kamil Salakhiev: I think we had a discussion recently with Felix, so, for example, when we support Bob, both get blobs v3 and…
Kamil Salakhiev: get blobs before, it kinda gets challenging to…
Kamil Salakhiev: Keep both of them performant, so…
Kamil Salakhiev: yeah, ELs, they kind of need to think of how to maybe introduce some kind of smart caching system, so, yeah, to, like, predict, which version.
Kamil Salakhiev: CL uses, something like that. Yeah, Boso, maybe, can you elaborate on this? Maybe some other implementation details that you'd like to share, maybe, to other ELs regarding Sparse Blotpool implementations, if you…
Kamil Salakhiev: Like, what you've been up to recently.
Bosul Mun: away.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay.
Bosul Mun: Before… before this, question, I have a question to Casey, so…
Bosul Mun: you want to prioritize saliva delta, because it's for Lois.
kasey: No, I was, I was just clarifying,
kasey: trying to clarify how quickly we are trying to get Sparse Blob Pool out. I think partial messages is…
kasey: still higher priority, and obviously, like, we'll have points where we can context switch and do some sparse blob pool work. I'm not saying partial messages has to be all the way done first, just kind of clarifying that I think partial messages is the higher priority thing to get moved through the pipeline.
Bosul Mun: I see.
Bosul Mun: Okay. And about the… the cache? So, CAS is currently working on local cache, and… I…
Bosul Mun: So, so the problem is that when you have sparse bopoo.
Bosul Mun: we have to recover blobs when GetBloves V3 is called. So it's technically possible, for CL to code get blobsP3 to sparsePopul, and in that case, we have to calculate
Bosul Mun: recover jobs on demand, and it will take some time, so…
Bosul Mun: We are trying to solve this, by implementing a cache that we can, preload and compute the blobs that
Bosul Mun: Is that… that are likely to be included in short period.
Bosul Mun: And this is also related to the…
Bosul Mun: pass blobs that will be introduced in Cell about Delta, and, in that case, we can use that pass blob signal as,
Bosul Mun: Cache load signal, and also compute the…
Bosul Mun: to pre-compute the things we will need in the future.
Bosul Mun: I will… I think we should specify this problem in the EIP. I will also work on that.
Kamil Salakhiev: Hmm. Okay.
Bosul Mun: for this meeting.
Bosul Mun: Yeah, so this… so this is…
Bosul Mun: how we will handle this problem, and I think it's important for other clients to be aware of this.
Csaba: So, I was thinking… Can't we…
Csaba: Be in a different opposition mode when we are…
Csaba: connected to CL, which is not supporting it.
Csaba: Yes, yes.
Bosul Mun: Yeah, so we are… Yes?
Csaba: Yeah, and I was just thinking maybe we should…
Csaba: Like, not being spars, proper position mode when the CL is not up to speed.
Csaba: Let me… we just avoid the problem, maybe.
Bosul Mun: But that… in that case, our band-based consumption will be bounded by how many CLs implemented, or using that block tree, and…
Bosul Mun: So, my approach is… Getting… those signals from CLs, like, they're, engine API capabilities, or,
Bosul Mun: The method they are calling, and… Pre-compute.
Bosul Mun: If it's needed.
Csaba: Okay, yeah, yeah, it might be better to be the dynamic.
Csaba: I was just thinking that we can have a shortcut.
Csaba: if… We just say, you have to have an update CL and DL to benefit from this.
Bosul Mun: I think that direction also makes sense, because if we are running for special mode, and CL is…
Bosul Mun: that don't have, doesn't have, GAPLOS B4, and if they are pulling that gap plus B3 only, then they will see a lot of, gloves missing.
Bosul Mun: So, in that case, increasing some… increasing the patch probability Can be also a solution.
Bosul Mun: I will think about this.
Csaba: Yeah, yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: Daniel?
Daniel Knopik: Yeah, Boswell, you, briefly mentioned that you were going to use has blobs as signal to warm up the cache. I… currently, I'm in my… in my draft branch, I call
Daniel Knopik: has blobs, wait for it to return, and then call get blobs. Should I keep it that way, or would it be better if I start both calls in parallel?
Bosul Mun: I was assuming that has blobs is pulled before GetBloves?
Bosul Mun: And there would be enough time for us to com… Preload or compute the blobs.
Bosul Mun: Fee for gap gloves is called.
Daniel Knopik: Okay, I mean, yeah.
Daniel Knopik: I think there is not much time between has blobs returning and Lighthouse then calling, get blobs, so… just noting that, but…
Daniel Knopik: Other events, otherwise, sounds good.
Bosul Mun: Huh?
Bosul Mun: Do you know how much time… how much duration we will have, like, roughly?
Daniel Knopik: Between the two calls?
Bosul Mun: Yes.
Daniel Knopik: it's… it's called right after. I think there's, like.
Daniel Knopik: I can measure, but it… It'll be, like, in the…
Daniel Knopik: Between Lighthouse seeing the call return and Lighthouse issuing the next call will be, like, microseconds or something.
Bosul Mun: I see, I see.
Daniel Knopik: Oh, a few milliseconds, I don't know. I'll check.
Bosul Mun: Okay.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, Casey?
kasey: On Prysm, we've also talked about possibly calling them concurrently, so that we can more quickly determine if we don't have a blob, and we can, for partial message purposes, send out our bitmap faster, when we just don't have a particular blob.
kasey: So from the EL point of view,
kasey: They would be almost at the same time, but it could be either or order.
kasey: So I'm wondering if that would be okay.
Bosul Mun: I, it's Felix, so I, I was…
Bosul Mun: I was just curious, though, regarding this,
Bosul Mun: this, HasBlobs call, so we were building on this assumption somehow that,
Bosul Mun: there would be some time passing between the has blobs and the get blobs call, because that would be…
Bosul Mun: Like, it would just be good for, like, in order to make… for this caching thing to make any sense, it obviously would be nice to know, like, which blobs you will need.
Bosul Mun: return from get blobs, like, as early as possible.
Bosul Mun: So that's why we were somehow assuming that you would know somehow earlier, you know, which blobs you would be calling has blobs on, and then later, when you actually need those blobs, you can
Bosul Mun: We would have them preloaded or something.
kasey: Right.
Bosul Mun: If you call them at the same time, it doesn't really make any sense, it just…
Daniel Knopik: I mean, originally, Hasblobs was conceived because, get blobs took a long time, and… All partial message.
Daniel Knopik: activity going, going, going outward was blocked on, on, on this, because we don't want to request any, any cells while,
Daniel Knopik: we are unsure what we have locally, so…
Daniel Knopik: we… we thought about has blobs, in order to
Daniel Knopik: At least figure out quickly what we can request from other peers.
Daniel Knopik: Until… while we wait for the slower get blobs call.
Daniel Knopik: And, this was, like, a interop thing, and we said, if it turns out that the performance issues,
Daniel Knopik: can be… can be fixed to a degree that we are happy with it, has blows basically becomes obsolete.
Daniel Knopik: Because…
Daniel Knopik: Yeah, knowing as early as possible which blobs we have is good, but having the blobs as well, so we call both at the same time as soon as we become aware of the KZG commitments.
Bosul Mun: Yeah, I mean, mostly with has blobs, it's good, because we… we can serve it kind of from memory, we don't need to load anything, we just… we can just tell… tell right away what's… what's there, so I think that has an advantage.
Bosul Mun: So it will still be faster with has blobs, I think.
Daniel Knopik: Great.
kasey: Yeah, so the… the…
kasey: Expanding a little bit more on the concurrent calls, the eel is trying to do two things when it makes these calls. One is to determine what bitmap to send out to its peers, and the other is to
kasey: get the cells from the EL so that it can populate, our partial message data structure, so that we can avoid
kasey: verifying proofs on incoming cells that we're getting from peers, if we do already have them.
kasey: So that's kind of why it's useful to be able to call both of these methods at the same time. But yeah, if we have a fast GetBlobs V4 query, then,
kasey: That's… that's kind of the…
kasey: optimal, solution. But it seems like HasBlobs's always going to be faster, so for partial message purposes, being able to have that fast path in parallel will let us get the bitmap out faster, and that's ultimately going to result in,
kasey: Messages propagating faster.
Raúl Kripalani: Yeah, so one thing that worries me about this design, and I… I mentioned it,
Raúl Kripalani: I think in Svalbard, is that it breaks the atomicity guarantee of GetBlob, so right now, when the CL asks the EL, it can… basically, there is just one request, and the EL is technically locking the internal, or freezing the view, or, like, acquiring a lock, and just…
Raúl Kripalani: returning a coherent response, a consistent response, but the problem is that when you split this over two requests, unless you batch them over JSON RPC, but then you need to represent the whole batch, or make an assumption that the whole batch needs to be atomic, so that's… that's another problem. You can actually have some… some drift between the has blobs and the get blobs. Technically, I know it… the chance is tiny, but it's still there, so it's a correctness problem.
Raúl Kripalani: So I would not, bifurcate this. If anything, I would just have get blobs return two responses, or stream two responses, and this is… this is possible. This is, I think…
Raúl Kripalani: There's an extension to the JSON RPC standard or something like that, that basically just returns, a multi-part response, so to speak. So you can maybe return the mask of what's available and what's not, as a first, unit, and then the actual get blobs payload as a second unit.
Raúl Kripalani: Because, just to be clear, the EL does not make any guarantees, continued guarantees about availability in the blog pool, and unless you lock that availability in some way, there is
Raúl Kripalani: Technically the possibility that the EL will decide to drop a blob that it previously told you it had, between the time it told you it had it and the time you actually requested it get blobs.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, we discussed that with Marco yesterday, actually. What we need, actually, is, I think, if we decide that, yeah, we need… has blobs, well, I think we need, and yeah, we need to specify that in engine API PR, and yeah, we should kind of specify, like, if EL reported that the blob is available.
Kamil Salakhiev: For how long it can, well, ECL can make assumptions for how long this blob will be available. And I think the fair assumption would be, like, so.
Kamil Salakhiev: For this slot, when has blob returned true.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, the blob should be available, and for the next slot, yeah, the blob can be already included, so it might not be there.
Kamil Salakhiev: Maybe… Yeah. Justifying that would help.
Raúl Kripalani: That's… I think that's a pragmatic solution. In that case, what I would do is definitely rename the method. It should not be called has blobs, because it implies, no side effects. That name implies no side effects, and this is side-effecting.
Raúl Kripalani: So, I would not… this is mutating state, so I would not call it has blobs any longer. Maybe, like, lock blobs, or, I don't know, prepare blobs, or something like that, I don't know.
Bosul Mun: Hi.
Bosul Mun: So… How about this? I… After the, the Celebrate Delta meeting, So, I…
Bosul Mun: it is possible to pin those blobs in cache. We already integrated that into the cache implementation, but…
Bosul Mun: It is still possible that The gloves that we had available is not…
Bosul Mun: actually, included in the cap gloves, because There can be some…
Bosul Mun: this corruption or something. So… because available blobs only looks to the lookup, and…
Bosul Mun: don't actually check whether we can decode, read those blobs from the disk, and return in as a response. So I…
Bosul Mun: I… we… so… Guests will try best to serve… to make this, property
Bosul Mun: satisfied, but I still think there should be some mechanism to
Bosul Mun: recover from this situation on CL.
Raúl Kripalani: Wait, but this… this sounds to me…
Raúl Kripalani: Oh, okay. This is a consistency trap, right? Because…
Raúl Kripalani: a problem like this would be an internal error in Geth, or, like, the EL, I don't… no finger-pointingeth, but, but just any EL, right? Because the memory view, or…
Raúl Kripalani: Like, the internal state would not be synced with… the,
Raúl Kripalani: with the durable state, right? Is that what you're saying? So basically, it could be that the blob is corrupted on disk, so you think you have it, but then when you return it, like.
Raúl Kripalani: It's corrupted, so it's either there's some bad bite there, or something else, like, what do you… is that what you're saying that could happen?
Bosul Mun: No, but we are talking about the same thing that you are talking about. There is a time difference between hand blocks and gap blocks, and thus there can be inconsistencies in the mempool.
Raúl Kripalani: Yeah.
Bosul Mun: over these inconsistencies with the cache, but then it's the question… I mean, it's totally possible for us to do that, but then the question is, should the CL really 100% rely on it? But Daniel already answered it in the chat here.
Bosul Mun: It's… there is not this assumption in the CL, at least not in Lighthouse right now, that what is marked as available in has blobs must match 100% what's returned in get blobs. It's just an optimization for them to…
Bosul Mun: prefetch more things, or deliver more things on the P2P layer while waiting for the response. So I think that's good. I mean, we can make it as perfect as possible, and yeah, if there's an internal error, we can always just fail the call or something.
Bosul Mun: But, yeah, we just wanted to highlight the same thing you highlighted, which is that there is this discrepancy between the two calls, and they are not fully atomic with each other, because they are two… taking a snapshot of the mempool at different times.
Raúl Kripalani: Yeah, yep. Daniel, is this failure, like, recovery path, or kind of, like, inconsistency recovery path, part of the spec already? Because it feels like it should be, if…
Raúl Kripalani: You know, we're relying on this to… like, on this dance, then we should have a section that says what to do when, we get fewer… we get, like, a… we don't get the full set of blobs that we expected, because that would trigger another path.
Raúl Kripalani: in… to request those cells, right? In partial messages.
Daniel Knopik: Do you… do you mean in the partial messages spec?
Raúl Kripalani: Yeah, because my understanding is that what we're doing is we use has blobs to then fire the lists, the one lists, to our peers before we actually get the data and we can reconcile, which kind of, like, saves some round-tripping, which is good. But then, like, if we have…
Raúl Kripalani: not signal that we need something, and then it turns out that we need it because the EL was not able to provide it, for example, then that would… that would be a failure recovery path, right?
Daniel Knopik: So, in the metadata, we have two bitmaps. One is the… I have.
Daniel Knopik: Basically, and the other one is the, requests,
Daniel Knopik: bit, bitmap, it's called. And…
Daniel Knopik: So if the… if gath tells me that it has certain, blobs, then I don't set my I have bit list, because I treat the calls as, you know.
Daniel Knopik: as their own thing. And, however, I request all the blobs that Geth claims to not have.
Daniel Knopik: So that others can already send me those, blobs, if they have them.
Daniel Knopik: If Gethnaw
Daniel Knopik: gives me blobs that they previously claimed not to have, that's not a problem, because either Piers already sent them, that's fine, or Piers will send them, yeah, that's a bit of wasted traffic, but that's not a problem. The other case, where some blob disappears.
Daniel Knopik: It's also fine, because as soon as GetBlob returns, I just request all the remaining blobs that…
Daniel Knopik: Our, you know, left.
Raúl Kripalani: Did you say that you… that we populate, the I want… sorry, the I have part with…
Raúl Kripalani: the initial response from Geth, with the… with the response from has blobs?
Daniel Knopik: Yeah, I said, we don't do that.
Raúl Kripalani: We don't do that.
Daniel Knopik: I don't do that.
Raúl Kripalani: Yeah, it would be a scoring, yeah, then it could turn into a scoring problem. If we said we had something, and then we retracted from that, like, yeah, okay, cool. Yeah, yeah, sounds good. Yeah, maybe we need to, like, I don't know what the current state of the spec is, but it might be worth adding, like, a node or an implementer's node around this or something.
Daniel Knopik: Sorry?
Daniel Knopik: Yeah.
Raúl Kripalani: Sorry, I was just saying that I don't know what the current state of the spec is right now, but it might be worth adding an implementer's note around this specific case.
Daniel Knopik: The spec was always a bit light around the exact flow of get blobs as well, and how that immediately translates to a published message.
Daniel Knopik: Was very focused on… on the actual validation of incoming partials, and, but not really around the EL calls.
Daniel Knopik: So yeah, it's not really explicit that these two calls are not atomic,
Daniel Knopik: With, respect to each other.
Daniel Knopik: it's kind of implied, but yeah, implementer's node sounds good somewhere. Maybe… maybe I can…
Daniel Knopik: Or, yeah, Michael, I'm not sure if he has time, but yeah, sounds good.
Kamil Salakhiev: Chabba?
Csaba: Yeah, I wasn't… part of the sparse blob pool discussion, but I still think the…
Csaba: streaming version, which, where you just simply send over the…
Csaba: What ideas did you have would be better.
Csaba: Like, the… It's like I was…
Csaba: kind of going in that direction, sometimes around GitOps VC, before there was, VC.
Csaba: And I just still think that that would be the right direction, so you just notify
Csaba: the CL amount drops that you have.
Csaba: Without… Making guitar requested spawns.
Csaba: I remember that I was looking at purchasing that DC at the time, and…
Csaba: for the protocol, that would be supported. For the implementation, so I don't know if that part's implemented or not. Anyway…
Csaba: I think it would just, in general, work better if… if you would… see, I would have this stream of…
Csaba: drops that are there in the element, and then just do the get core when it wants to get something.
Csaba: Rather than playing this… is… when should I ask whether you have it or not kind of game?
Csaba: Just feels that much will.
Csaba: It's smart.
Csaba: That's…
Csaba: Because I don't know what to say.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah. Okay.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, if nothing… On that, nothing more. Yeah, I think just…
Kamil Salakhiev: Just as an action item, yeah, like, when NECL, yeah, introduced support for the…
Kamil Salakhiev: Whoa.
Kamil Salakhiev: for the Sparse blog post, please ping on Discord channel, yeah, we should create this channel, like, today, I think.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, then we can signal, for the readiness for the next blob.net, depending on cost, like, on…
Kamil Salakhiev: how many ELs support that, so I see that, yeah, Geth is active, Nethermind should be good, and the ethrex also has APR.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: Nice.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, Chab, I think you have your hand raised, but you just didn't lower it.
Kamil Salakhiev: Oh, good, nice.
Kamil Salakhiev: Cool, nice, yeah, anything else? Any other, discussions from anyone?
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, if not, I just can really quick, do an update of, like, what's going on in,
Kamil Salakhiev: like, lean theorems between drop,
Kamil Salakhiev: like, universe, what's going on there. Yeah, we've been, like, Itrox guys can aware, but yeah, we're already working on…
Kamil Salakhiev: DevNet4 and, like, trying to make more stable networks there.
Kamil Salakhiev: One issue was… Scaling is that, yeah, we just… DevNets were really small.
Kamil Salakhiev: And, basically the challenge that we have there, comparing, like, to existing Ethereum, is that, yeah, the signatures
Kamil Salakhiev: Becoming larger instead of, like, 200 bytes,
Kamil Salakhiev: messages, we have, like, 1.5 kilobytes, at least. That's the goal, per signature. At the moment, we have 2.5 kilobytes per message, and instead of… and we cannot aggregate them.
Kamil Salakhiev: just as easy and, like, as fast as we do that for BLS signature, so it kind of, like, takes…
Kamil Salakhiev: 1,000 signatures per second for aggregation, and, like, then another
Kamil Salakhiev: when we have SNARKs, we need to aggregate them with a rate of 10 signatures per second, and the resulting snark is, like, 128 kilobytes of size.
Kamil Salakhiev: And then, yeah, this SNARK is included into block, so basically, yeah, we just wanted to…
Kamil Salakhiev: Check how it's, gonna work on…
Kamil Salakhiev: peak pillar, so, yeah, I've been working with the Zoom team and, yeah, Also, we'll be trying to…
Kamil Salakhiev: integrate more clients soon. Basically, we have these…
Kamil Salakhiev: Further, if I can open it. It's… it's currently on my server, but yeah, we will redeploy it on, well, elsewhere soon.
Kamil Salakhiev: Basically, yeah, we've been running this,
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, the fazer is just as… we have two sets of nodes. We have either 32 nodes or 64 nodes, so we were… yeah, we did not go higher, for the reasons I'll explain later.
Kamil Salakhiev: Just assigning randomly nodes for different regions, and assigning them random bandwidth, and…
Kamil Salakhiev: basically, then, each block would ha- would have, at very least, one SSNARK, in… in it, sometimes it's more, and, that's already kind of… well, basically, the block size is at very least,
Kamil Salakhiev: well, current SNARK size is 256 kilobytes, so at the very least it's 256 kilobytes. That's only CL, that's only Bitcoin block, so we don't have any kind of…
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, EL payload there, so… Yeah, so the propagation was,
Kamil Salakhiev: Even for 32 noses, that's already kinda… Like, around,
Kamil Salakhiev: Like, 500 milliseconds for 32 nodes.
Kamil Salakhiev: And, yeah, and the network was kind of relatively stable, but when we were switching for the higher amount of notes, like, 64, yeah, things already started to…
Kamil Salakhiev: Look more messy. So we see that finalization, for example, is not as stable, so we are kind of… we're not finalizing every block, but we have these gaps.
Kamil Salakhiev: When blocks are not… finalized in time. Yeah, we're using 3SF here, it's not, like, existing consensus from Ethereum.
Kamil Salakhiev: And, yeah, we see that, well, basically, the larger the block sizes, the larger… well, the slower is the latency for propagation.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, sometimes it was, like, actually the… the slot time there was around 4 seconds, and sometimes the block propagation for… yeah, was actually around this slot time, which is bad. That's just… yeah, we were testing, like, the assumptions of,
Kamil Salakhiev: yeah, how much we can scale with existing P2P networking. And by the way, here we also
Kamil Salakhiev: for now, we just ignored the fact that, yeah, we also have to take into account that aggregation is slow. Yeah, we… I think Zeam and some other clients, they will be introducing these flags to kind of put artificial, sleep for the time when we need to aggregate.
Kamil Salakhiev: So that the simulation is kind of more, kind of more realistic.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yes, so, yeah, just… the goal of this father is just, yeah, so we'll be testing both stability and also how the network behaves, like, for these size of signatures and aggregations.
Kamil Salakhiev: We'll be able to kind of, like, test different combinations of clients.
Kamil Salakhiev: And, yeah.
Kamil Salakhiev: that's kind of it, so yeah, if any… yeah, it's just… we would deploy it elsewhere, but yeah, if anyone wants to take a look deeper, yeah, I can share the link, in the chat.
Kamil Salakhiev: And the code is… Charlene Shadow Fazer…
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, you can also take a look if you want.
Kamil Salakhiev: Yeah, that's just kind of what's going on on PQ end.
Kamil Salakhiev: But yeah,
Kamil Salakhiev: there will be, like, future dev nets, or things might change. And also, yeah, the PQ team is actually working on, kind of, reducing the sizes of signatures and speeding up the aggregation.
Kamil Salakhiev: So yeah, things might change.
Kamil Salakhiev: In future.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, good.
Kamil Salakhiev: I think that's all that we had in agenda for today. Yeah, any other topics that anyone wants to bring up?
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay, nice. If not, then yeah, thanks everyone for joining.
Kamil Salakhiev: Thanks, see you in two weeks.
Kamil Salakhiev: Okay,
Daniel Knopik: Bye-bye!
kasey: Thank you.
Pablo Deymo | Lambda: Do you mind?
Anton Nashatyrev: Bye-bye.